In your work, you quote Nietzsche quite a bit, his line,
he who has a why to live for can bear almost any how.
What do you think he meant by that?
The same as I am intended to convey to my readers and students,
that the vision of a meaning ahead of someone,
a meaning in wait for someone to be fulfilled by someone,
that this contributes most than anything else
under equal circumstances for survival.
Meaning is the most important thing in our lives?
Certainly, because what I call a will to meaning,
the wish to find and to fulfill meaning
is the basic motivation in human beings.
This certainly runs counter to much of the determinist notions
that are being bandied around about these days
as man is a machine, man is a computer,
man is a product of instincts.
Man is something like a rat in experiments,
psychological experiments.
Of course you are right, but not only against
the so-called deterministic concepts of man,
but also regarding the motivational theories
of certain psychotherapeutic systems.
Let's talk for a minute about logotherapy,
which arose out of this notion of a search for meaning.
Logotherapy is one among other types of psychotherapy,
is, we may say, a meaning-centered psychotherapy.
In as much particularly as logotherapy
sees a human being not predominantly determined,
not to say dominated, by the will to pleasure,
as you were mentioning, nor by the will to power
along the lines of Adlerian teachings,
but basically, fundamentally, by a will to meaning.
That is to say the desire, the impulse,
to find, to discover in life, or better to say
in each life situation, concrete life situation,
confronting someone, the desire to find a meaning therein
and to go on to fulfill it.
I was very intrigued.
One of the most surprising things I've read recently
was that you said that when you talked to European students,
only 40% said they had suffered this sort of inner void,
and yet 81% of American students experience the same thing.
This was decades ago.
We think of it just the opposite.
We think of the Europeans as being buried under this
existential dread and sense of purposelessness,
and Americans as being optimistic and upbeat.
However it might be, whether the ones or the others
are suffering more or less, respectively,
from this existential vacuum,
the ones who seem to suffer less
should not look at the others with contempt,
but look at the others with compassion
and look for anything possible to help the others.
Now this void manifests itself as apathy.
In apathy, in boredom, lack of initiative,
lack of interest in the world,
or initiative in changing something within the world for the better.
This frustration is a proof
of the existence of a will to meaning.
Unless we were imbued by a will to meaning,
by the wish to find meaning and discover
and fulfill meaning in life,
we never would be able to experience an inner void.
So this is in a way also something positive.
Now you've listed three types of values.
Creative values, experiential values, and attitudinal values.
You may find a meaning, the average man,
the man on the street or the woman on the street,
may find a meaning day by day in doing a deed,
in creating a work.
That's the creative.
Creative, and in experiencing something,
the beauty, the truth, the researcher,
or the good in dealing with people as a teacher or whatsoever.
There's an extraordinary moment in Man's Search for Meaning
where you talk about being in one of the Nazi camps
and all of you going out to look at a sunset.
Is that experiential?
Exactly. This is a paradigm of experiential values,
of finding a meaning in experiencing without doing anything,
without achieving or accomplishing anything,
but just in giving oneself the immediate experience
of something beautiful going on in the world.
This is the second avenue.
But there is also another aspect of experiential values.
Not only experiencing something,
but also experiencing someone.
More than that, experiencing another human being
in his or her very uniqueness.
It is the main attribute of a human being
that he is a person in contrast to any animal.
A person is always something absolutely unique,
irrepeatable in the evolution of the cosmos,
incomparable with any other human being.
And this uniqueness can be got hold of solely by a loving person
because he not only sees the essence,
but also the potentials in the beloved person.
Thereby, as I put it before, promoting him, alleviating it,
to reach out to attain this potential and to fulfill
and thereby actualize also himself.
But not by preaching self-actualization.
It's nonsense.
Self-actualization can only fall into your lap automatically
once that you have fulfilled a concrete meaning,
done the best of a situation.
Then you actualize yourself as a byproduct.
Let's talk about the third set of values,
which is the attitudinal,
the idea of choosing how to respond to suffering.
Choosing the attitude.
Yes.
If there is no possibility in a given situation
to fulfill the meaning of a situation
by giving oneself to the experience of beauty and so forth,
nor if you have lost the capability to do your job,
to do your work,
even then there is an ultimate possibility
to find and fulfill meaning.
Not only the ultimate,
it is even the potential to fulfill the deepest meaning,
to attain the highest values.
By your approach to this situation,
a tragic or a sad situation confronting you.
You said that in part of the initial shock
of being put in a death camp
was ultimately an acceptance that we knew we had nothing to lose
except our ridiculously naked lives.
Is that the situation that they're in?
In a way.
Is this when you make the choice of how you're going to...
your last value choice is how to react to the situation?
You stand there, you stood there naked
with nothing you could have had,
but all the more what counted and mattered was what you were,
being rather than having, possessing anything,
or the being.
So what counted was what you make out of the situation,
what attitude you adopt in the situation.
And there's a multitude,
a wealth of possible attitudes to how to approach it.
So we have to decide.
The ultimate, I would take it,
attitudinal value challenge that we all share
is how we're going to face death.
How do you prepare people for that?
How do you prepare yourself for that?
I couldn't prepare anyone else unless I would have prepared myself.
Because you, if you were a psychiatrist,
your patients feel exactly whether or not
you are really convinced of what you are teaching and telling them.
Now, I'm convinced that in contrast to the usual aspect,
albeit sound aspect, to life,
and more specifically to the past,
to life's transitoriness,
and this includes that each of us is approaching death.
In contrast to that, I maintain that in the past nothing is lost,
but right on the contrary, everything is stored forever.
It is not annihilated by transitoriness,
but on the contrary, it is becoming preserved forever.
Something you have done can never be undone.
Something you have experienced,
something you have even experienced in a negative sense,
going through suffering.
And if you have, for instance,
if you have gone through this suffering honestly, courageously,
and with dignity, who in the world,
what in the world can annihilate this?
What you have done has been done forever in both ways,
in a negative as in a positive way.
It cannot be undone.
And the past is a storehouse of what you have done,
what you have experienced, what you have gone through,
and what you have done out of all the negative and tragic aspects
as even encountered within your life.
I want to thank you for being on the show,
and I want to thank you at home for watching.